---
title: Savoia-Marchetti S.M.81 Pipstrello
country: Italy
planetype: Heavy Bomber
maxspeed: 211
image: /1023812-SM_81-Pipstrello-172-69917-1_yoxpax.jpg
---
The Savoia-Marchetti S.M.81  Pipstrello was a development of the Savoia-Marchetti S.M.73      passenger airliner which had first flown in prototype form on 4 June 1934. Like the airliner from which it was derived, the S.M.81 was a three-engine cantilever low-wing monoplane with fixed tailwheel landing gear. First flown in early 1935, it was available in some numbers by the time that Italy invaded Abyssinia (Ethiopia) on 3 October 1935. Here, in addition to its dedicated bomber role, it was used also for reconnaissance and transport roles. The next operational use of the type came during the Spanish Civil War, S.M.81s were among the first aircraft provided in support of General Franco, and others served in Spain a little later as components of the Aviazione Legionaria. By the time Italy became involved in World War II about 100 remained in service with the Regia Aeronautica, but although it was already completely outdated the S.M.81 was to be found wherever Italian forces were fighting. Due to its vulnerability to attack, it was used primarily for second-line duties, but with the protection of darkness, many found important use as night bombers, particularly in North Africa. Some remained in service at the time of the Italian surrender, continuing in operation with the Aeronautica Cobelligerante del Sud, and a few survived the war to serve for five or six years with the post-war Aeronautica Militare Italiana.